IMPLEMENTATION_STATUS.md, before:

# NMR Sample Manager - Implementation Status

## Summary

The Topspin Sample Manager Jython/Swing application has been **fully implemented** and is ready for testing in the Topspin environment.

## Completed Components

### Core Modules (src/lib/)

1. **sample_io.py** ✓
   - JSON file I/O with proper timestamping
   - Filename generation (YYYY-MM-DD_HHMMSS_label.json)
   - Sample status checking (active/ejected)
   - Auto-ejection of active samples
   - File listing and parsing

2. **schema_form.py** ✓
   - Dynamic Swing form generation from JSON schema
   - Handles all field types: strings, numbers, enums, arrays, nested objects
   - Array fields with add/remove functionality
   - Data loading and extraction

3. **timeline.py** ✓
   - Timeline entry class for samples and experiments
   - Chronological sorting
   - Experiment directory detection (integer dirs with acqus file)
   - Acqus file parsing for experiment details (pulprog, nucleus, scans)

### Main Application (src/)

1. **samples.py** ✓
   - Persistent GUI using System Properties singleton pattern
   - Auto-navigation to current dataset (CURDATA)
   - Sample list with status indicators [ACTIVE]/[EJECTED]
   - Form view with schema-driven UI
   - Timeline view showing samples and experiments
   - Action buttons: New Sample, Duplicate, Edit, Save, Eject (Virtual/Physical), Quit
   - Directory browsing and navigation
   - Status bar with feedback

2. **aij.py** ✓
   - Auto-inject command
   - Creates new sample (auto-ejects previous)
   - Placeholder for physical injection command

3. **aej.py** ✓
   - Auto-eject command
   - Automatically finds and ejects active sample
   - Placeholder for physical ejection command

## File Structure

```
src/
├── samples.py          # Main GUI application
├── aij.py              # Auto-inject command
├── aej.py              # Auto-eject command
├── schemas/
│   ├── current/
│   │   └── schema.json    # Active JSON schema
│   └── versions/
│       └── v0.0.1/
│           └── schema.json # Versioned schemas
└── lib/
    ├── sample_io.py    # JSON file operations
    ├── schema_form.py  # Schema -> Swing form generator
    └── timeline.py     # Timeline view logic
```

## Key Features Implemented

### Sample Management
- ✓ Create new samples with auto-ejection of previous active sample
- ✓ Edit existing samples
- ✓ Duplicate samples (for titration series, etc.)
- ✓ Eject samples (virtual timestamp + physical placeholder)
- ✓ List samples with status indicators

### Form Interface
- ✓ Automatically generated from JSON schema
- ✓ All field types supported (text, number, dropdown, array)
- ✓ Nested objects (Sample.Components, Buffer.Components)
- ✓ Data validation from schema
- ✓ Scrollable form panel

### Timeline View
- ✓ Chronological display of samples and experiments
- ✓ Sample creation and ejection events
- ✓ Experiment detection (integer directories + acqus file)
- ✓ Experiment details (pulprog, nucleus, scan count)
- ✓ Double-click to open experiment in Topspin (implemented)

### Integration
- ✓ Singleton pattern for persistent state
- ✓ External command support (aij, aej)
- ✓ Auto-navigation to current dataset
- ✓ Directory browsing
- ✓ Schema versioning support with graceful error handling
- ✓ GitHub Actions workflow for automatic schema syncing

## Testing Checklist

Before using in production, test the following:

### Basic Functionality
- [ ] Run `samples` command from Topspin - GUI appears
- [ ] Navigate to current dataset - correct directory shown
- [ ] Browse to different directory - sample list updates
- [ ] Close window and run `samples` again - same instance appears

### Sample Operations
- [ ] Create new sample - form appears, save creates JSON file
- [ ] Edit sample - loads data, modifications save correctly
- [ ] Duplicate sample - copies data, creates new file
- [ ] Eject sample - adds ejected_timestamp to metadata
- [ ] Verify one active sample rule - creating new auto-ejects previous

### Form Functionality
- [ ] All field types work (text, number, dropdown)
- [ ] Array fields (Users, Components) - add/remove buttons work
- [ ] Nested objects display correctly
- [ ] Data persists after save/reload

### Timeline View
- [ ] Sample events appear chronologically
- [ ] Experiments detected (integer dirs with acqus)
- [ ] Experiment details shown (pulprog, etc.)
- [ ] Double-click experiment opens in Topspin

### Integration Commands
- [ ] `aij` creates new sample injection entry
- [ ] `aej` ejects active sample
- [ ] Both commands work when app not running (start app first)

### File Format
- [ ] JSON files follow naming convention: YYYY-MM-DD_HHMMSS_label.json
- [ ] Metadata timestamps correct (created, modified, ejected)
- [ ] Schema version recorded
- [ ] Files readable by web app (compatibility check)

## Recent Improvements

### Schema Management (2025-10)
- ✓ Refactored schema storage to versioned directory structure
- ✓ Added GitHub Actions workflow for automatic schema syncing
- ✓ Implemented graceful error handling for missing schema versions
- ✓ User-friendly error panel when schema version not found
- ✓ Clear guidance to update installation when schemas missing

## Known Limitations / TODO

1. **Physical Injection/Ejection Commands**
   - Currently using `MSG()` placeholders
   - Need to determine correct Topspin commands (XCMD? custom?)
   - Check Topspin documentation or existing AU programs

2. **Experiment Opening**
   - Double-click timeline entry calls `RE()` function
   - May need adjustment based on Topspin version/configuration
   - Need to properly parse NAME/EXPNO/PROCNO from directory structure

3. **Form Validation**
   - Schema validation framework in place
   - Could add more visual feedback (red borders, tooltips)
   - Currently relies on schema constraints only

4. **Keyboard Shortcuts**
   - Not implemented
   - Could add: Enter to save, Esc to cancel, etc.

5. **Help Documentation**
   - No in-app help yet
   - Could add Help button linking to usage.html

## Next Steps

1. **Testing in Topspin Environment**
   - Copy `src/` directory to Topspin Python scripts location
   - Test all functionality with real NMR data
   - Verify CURDATA() navigation works correctly
   - Test with actual experiment directories

2. **Determine Physical Commands**
   - Research Topspin commands for sample injection/ejection
   - Update `aij.py` and `aej.py` with real commands
   - Test with SampleJet if available

3. **Integration Testing**
   - Test with web app - verify JSON compatibility
   - Ensure schema versioning works
   - Test with existing sample files

4. **User Feedback**
   - Get feedback from lab users
   - Adjust UI based on real-world usage
   - Add requested features

## Installation Instructions

1. Copy the `src/` directory to your Topspin Python user scripts directory:
   ```
   /opt/topspin4.4.0/exp/stan/nmr/py/user/sample-manager/
   ```

2. Ensure schema files exist:
   ```
   src/schemas/current/schema.json         # Active schema
   src/schemas/versions/v0.0.1/schema.json # Version 0.0.1
   ```

   Note: The GitHub Actions workflow will automatically sync schema updates from the schema repository.

3. Run from Topspin command line:
   ```
   samples    # Main GUI
   aij        # Auto-inject
   aej        # Auto-eject
   ```

## Notes

- Application uses System Properties singleton pattern - state persists across script runs
- Window close hides (not disposes) to preserve state
- Use Quit button or restart Topspin for fresh instance
- All scripts must be in same directory to share lib modules
- JSON files compatible with web app (same schema)

## Support

For issues or questions:
- Check `CLAUDE.md` for detailed implementation notes
- Review `info/usage.html` for user documentation
- Examine web app code in `info/js/` for reference

Commit message:

Update TopSpin name for consistency

IMPLEMENTATION_STATUS.md, after:

# NMR Sample Manager - Implementation Status

## Summary

The TopSpin Sample Manager Jython/Swing application has been **fully implemented** and is ready for testing in the TopSpin environment.

## Completed Components

### Core Modules (src/lib/)

1. **sample_io.py** ✓
   - JSON file I/O with proper timestamping
   - Filename generation (YYYY-MM-DD_HHMMSS_label.json)
   - Sample status checking (active/ejected)
   - Auto-ejection of active samples
   - File listing and parsing

2. **schema_form.py** ✓
   - Dynamic Swing form generation from JSON schema
   - Handles all field types: strings, numbers, enums, arrays, nested objects
   - Array fields with add/remove functionality
   - Data loading and extraction

3. **timeline.py** ✓
   - Timeline entry class for samples and experiments
   - Chronological sorting
   - Experiment directory detection (integer dirs with acqus file)
   - Acqus file parsing for experiment details (pulprog, nucleus, scans)

### Main Application (src/)

1. **samples.py** ✓
   - Persistent GUI using System Properties singleton pattern
   - Auto-navigation to current dataset (CURDATA)
   - Sample list with status indicators [ACTIVE]/[EJECTED]
   - Form view with schema-driven UI
   - Timeline view showing samples and experiments
   - Action buttons: New Sample, Duplicate, Edit, Save, Eject (Virtual/Physical), Quit
   - Directory browsing and navigation
   - Status bar with feedback

2. **aij.py** ✓
   - Auto-inject command
   - Creates new sample (auto-ejects previous)
   - Placeholder for physical injection command

3. **aej.py** ✓
   - Auto-eject command
   - Automatically finds and ejects active sample
   - Placeholder for physical ejection command

## File Structure

```
src/
├── samples.py          # Main GUI application
├── aij.py              # Auto-inject command
├── aej.py              # Auto-eject command
├── schemas/
│   ├── current/
│   │   └── schema.json    # Active JSON schema
│   └── versions/
│       └── v0.0.1/
│           └── schema.json # Versioned schemas
└── lib/
    ├── sample_io.py    # JSON file operations
    ├── schema_form.py  # Schema -> Swing form generator
    └── timeline.py     # Timeline view logic
```

## Key Features Implemented

### Sample Management
- ✓ Create new samples with auto-ejection of previous active sample
- ✓ Edit existing samples
- ✓ Duplicate samples (for titration series, etc.)
- ✓ Eject samples (virtual timestamp + physical placeholder)
- ✓ List samples with status indicators

### Form Interface
- ✓ Automatically generated from JSON schema
- ✓ All field types supported (text, number, dropdown, array)
- ✓ Nested objects (Sample.Components, Buffer.Components)
- ✓ Data validation from schema
- ✓ Scrollable form panel

### Timeline View
- ✓ Chronological display of samples and experiments
- ✓ Sample creation and ejection events
- ✓ Experiment detection (integer directories + acqus file)
- ✓ Experiment details (pulprog, nucleus, scan count)
- ✓ Double-click to open experiment in TopSpin (implemented)

### Integration
- ✓ Singleton pattern for persistent state
- ✓ External command support (aij, aej)
- ✓ Auto-navigation to current dataset
- ✓ Directory browsing
- ✓ Schema versioning support with graceful error handling
- ✓ GitHub Actions workflow for automatic schema syncing

## Testing Checklist

Before using in production, test the following:

### Basic Functionality
- [ ] Run `samples` command from TopSpin - GUI appears
- [ ] Navigate to current dataset - correct directory shown
- [ ] Browse to different directory - sample list updates
- [ ] Close window and run `samples` again - same instance appears

### Sample Operations
- [ ] Create new sample - form appears, save creates JSON file
- [ ] Edit sample - loads data, modifications save correctly
- [ ] Duplicate sample - copies data, creates new file
- [ ] Eject sample - adds ejected_timestamp to metadata
- [ ] Verify one active sample rule - creating new auto-ejects previous

### Form Functionality
- [ ] All field types work (text, number, dropdown)
- [ ] Array fields (Users, Components) - add/remove buttons work
- [ ] Nested objects display correctly
- [ ] Data persists after save/reload

### Timeline View
- [ ] Sample events appear chronologically
- [ ] Experiments detected (integer dirs with acqus)
- [ ] Experiment details shown (pulprog, etc.)
- [ ] Double-click experiment opens in TopSpin

### Integration Commands
- [ ] `aij` creates new sample injection entry
- [ ] `aej` ejects active sample
- [ ] Both commands work when app not running (start app first)

### File Format
- [ ] JSON files follow naming convention: YYYY-MM-DD_HHMMSS_label.json
- [ ] Metadata timestamps correct (created, modified, ejected)
- [ ] Schema version recorded
- [ ] Files readable by web app (compatibility check)

## Recent Improvements

### Schema Management (2025-10)
- ✓ Refactored schema storage to versioned directory structure
- ✓ Added GitHub Actions workflow for automatic schema syncing
- ✓ Implemented graceful error handling for missing schema versions
- ✓ User-friendly error panel when schema version not found
- ✓ Clear guidance to update installation when schemas missing

## Known Limitations / TODO

1. **Physical Injection/Ejection Commands**
   - Currently using `MSG()` placeholders
   - Need to determine correct TopSpin commands (XCMD? custom?)
   - Check TopSpin documentation or existing AU programs

2. **Experiment Opening**
   - Double-click timeline entry calls `RE()` function
   - May need adjustment based on TopSpin version/configuration
   - Need to properly parse NAME/EXPNO/PROCNO from directory structure

3. **Form Validation**
   - Schema validation framework in place
   - Could add more visual feedback (red borders, tooltips)
   - Currently relies on schema constraints only

4. **Keyboard Shortcuts**
   - Not implemented
   - Could add: Enter to save, Esc to cancel, etc.

5. **Help Documentation**
   - No in-app help yet
   - Could add Help button linking to usage.html

## Next Steps

1. **Testing in TopSpin Environment**
   - Copy `src/` directory to TopSpin Python scripts location
   - Test all functionality with real NMR data
   - Verify CURDATA() navigation works correctly
   - Test with actual experiment directories

2. **Determine Physical Commands**
   - Research TopSpin commands for sample injection/ejection
   - Update `aij.py` and `aej.py` with real commands
   - Test with SampleJet if available

3. **Integration Testing**
   - Test with web app - verify JSON compatibility
   - Ensure schema versioning works
   - Test with existing sample files

4. **User Feedback**
   - Get feedback from lab users
   - Adjust UI based on real-world usage
   - Add requested features

## Installation Instructions

1. Copy the `src/` directory to your TopSpin Python user scripts directory:
   ```
   /opt/topspin4.4.0/exp/stan/nmr/py/user/sample-manager/
   ```

2. Ensure schema files exist:
   ```
   src/schemas/current/schema.json         # Active schema
   src/schemas/versions/v0.0.1/schema.json # Version 0.0.1
   ```

   Note: The GitHub Actions workflow will automatically sync schema updates from the schema repository.

3. Run from TopSpin command line:
   ```
   samples    # Main GUI
   aij        # Auto-inject
   aej        # Auto-eject
   ```

## Notes

- Application uses System Properties singleton pattern - state persists across script runs
- Window close hides (not disposes) to preserve state
- Use Quit button or restart TopSpin for fresh instance
- All scripts must be in same directory to share lib modules
- JSON files compatible with web app (same schema)

## Support

For issues or questions:
- Check `CLAUDE.md` for detailed implementation notes
- Review `info/usage.html` for user documentation
- Examine web app code in `info/js/` for reference
